---
layout: post
title: Who is Rey?
date: '2016-01-05 08:57:10'
categories: understanding_the_force_awakens
---

Given how important lineage is to Star Wars, it's unlikely that Rey is a randomer.

The plot also has some fun with this:

* Maz to Han in the cantina: "So who's the girl?"
Knowing look
Scene cuts

* Storm trooper to Ren on Starkiller base:
"There's a girl"
"What girl????"

Secondly, it's been stated by Daisy Ridley, it's been stated in interview that's this is someone we know.

Finally, Rey is the show's titular character "The Force Awakens" being a reference to Rey's awakening. It's unlikely or just plain bad script writing for her to have inconsequential background.

It's unlikely that she would have unimportant background after this build up.

So what are the main theories concerning Rey's background?

###Rey is Han and Leia's daughter (aka Rey is a Solo)

Given how strong Rey is with the force, it seems likely that she is a Skywalker. For most of The Force Awakens, it seemed like she was a natural setup for Han and Leia's daughter

* Finds and deftly pilots the Millennium Falcon? Check. 
* Amazing engineer? Check.
* Natural dialogue with Han? Check.

But later in the movie this theory starts to fall apart. Han and Leia clearly have no recollection of her whatsoever. So most likely this one is false - unless there's some kind of mind wipe involved.

###Rey is Luke's daughter (aka Rey is a Skywalker)

OK, so Rey is not a Solo. But could she be Luke's daughter?

* Explains her tremendous Force capability 
* Luke (and Anakin's) light sabre calls out to her
* The screenplay notes that Luke recognises her

However this theory also has a problem. If Luke is the father, who is the mother? There are no credible candidates and the plot would have to go through some awkward contortions to make one. Also, Luke is a priest like or messianic Jedi figure - we know they devote their lives to the Force - no kids!

###Rey is Obi-wan's daughter (aka Rey is a Kenobi)

* Obi-wan was in possession of the light sabre for quite some time 

Do some more reading on this one

###Rey is the best student from Luke's Jedi academy

Perhaps Rey doesn't have established lineage after all. Perhaps she's the miracle discovery of Luke's Jedi academy, and when things start to go bad, she gets secreted away on Jakku.

This would explain why she thinks there is someone coming to get her.
