--- 
layout: post
title: “Unlocking CGA Gaming on the Amstrad PC1640 with the ATI Graphics Solution SR”
date: ‘2025-08-17 12:28:00:00’
summary: |-
  The **ATI Graphics Solution SR** is a clever piece of hardware with a unique trick: it can **emulate CGA output on an MDA monitor**.
  
  Let’s try it out!  
tags: []
---


One of the quirks of retro hardware is that what you see on paper doesn’t always line up with what you get in practice. Take the **Amstrad PC1640** for example: although the built-in Paradise graphics chip is fully capable of both **CGA** and **EGA** colour modes, the bundled **PC-MD monochrome monitor** limits you to text and Hercules-style monochrome graphics.  

That’s fine for productivity, but what about games?  

I wanted to enjoy some classics in CGA without swapping the whole monitor setup. The solution came in the form of an **ATI Graphics Solution SR** graphics card -- a clever piece of hardware with a unique trick: it can **emulate CGA output on an MDA monitor**. Perfect!  


## Disabling the Built-In Graphics  

Before installing the ATI card, the PC1640 needs to be told to expect an add-on CGA card instead of its built-in graphics chip. That’s done via DIP switches on the motherboard:  

- **SW10 = On** (disable on-board graphics)  
- **SW6, SW7 = Off, On** (select add-on CGA, 80-column mode)  

👉 Reference: [Amstrad PC1640 DIP switch settings](https://www.seasip.info/AmstradXT/pc1640dip.html)  


## Configuring the Graphics Solution SR  

With the machine ready, it’s time to configure the **Graphics Solution SR** for CGA emulation:  

- **SW1, SW2 = Off, Off** (CGA emulation mode)  
- **SW3, SW4, SW5 = On, Off, Off** (mono monitor selected)  

👉 Reference: [ATI Graphics Solution SR documentation (The Retro Web)](https://theretroweb.com/expansioncard/documentation/52891.pdf)  


## The Results  

After powering up -- success! The system booted with the ATI card handling video, and I was able to play a selection of **classic CGA games** on the monochrome Amstrad monitor.  

Even better, the card displayed **grayscale tones**, which look much richer than standard Hercules graphics. The downside is a noticeable **flicker**, caused by the interlaced mode the card uses to display CGA emulation on an MDA screen. Still, for the novelty of playing colour games on a mono display, it’s a pretty neat trick.  


## Switching Back to Hercules  

Want to return to Hercules mode? No problem -- it just takes a quick switch configuration:  

**On the PC1640 motherboard:**  
- **SW10 = On** (disable on-board graphics)  
- **SW6, SW7 = On, On** (select add-on MDA)  

**On the Graphics Solution SR:**  
- **SW1, SW2 = On, Off** (monochrome mode)  
- **SW3, SW4, SW5 = On, Off, Off** (mono monitor)  

👉 [ATI GS-SR documentation again](https://theretroweb.com/expansioncard/documentation/52891.pdf)  

And just like that, you’re back in Hercules land.  


## Final Thoughts  

The **ATI Graphics Solution SR** is a fascinating card that bridges the gap between productivity-oriented mono PCs and the world of colourful CGA gaming. Sure, the flicker makes it less than perfect for long play sessions, but it adds a whole new dimension to what’s possible on the Amstrad PC1640 without swapping hardware.  

For retro enthusiasts, it’s a reminder that sometimes the most interesting features come not from raw performance, but from clever engineering workarounds.  
